---
title: Air and Writing
author: Sidharth Baskaran
date: July 17, 2021
---

The roar of jets is normalized such that it's essentially the same as a street horn or car engine starting. But let's look deeper at what these actually are. A car engine starting involves the sequential mechanic initialization of thousands of components from their initial states. A horn uses advanced acoustic physics in order to amplify an electronic signal into something that's a mere annoyance to our ears. The point is, things we look at every day are taken for granted. It'd be impossible not to, or we'd never move forward. I can either focus on why my butterfly or scissor mechanism under each key or keyboard works perfectly everytime without failing under thousands of inputs, light or heavy being dependent on my mood, inspiration, and energy at that moment, or focus on what I'm trying to type (e.g. this). Delaying the crux of this piece, consider the air, even. It moves in a way that can sometimes and sometimes not be percieved, with the wind being an example. 

I'm going to share a descriptive anecdote of a plane taking off, a McDonnell Douglas MD-83 to be specific, since details matter. It may be mundane from a first glance, but what I want to show is how one can take anything and conjure a image from it. Images are great, but they can only tell what we observe. If you read a piece of text, then the chances are that it's designed to force you to glean every character from it until you know exactly what it's talking about. We do need images to visualize things or supplement things that are conveyed in text. But text is simply the most effective way of cramming information into your head. An image can say a lot, and they do say that a picture is worth a thousand words, but I would say that applies more to math problems, not the point I'm trying to get across. Here it goes.

I feel the air, enveloping me like a nonexistent blanket, whatever that means. I'm sitting on the stone embankment at the Austin-Bergstrom International Airport viewing area, just left of the 9000-foot concrete-paved Runway 17L, which shimmers under the typical Texas heat which I've grown to love, hate, and observe more closely. The sky is bright blue, with the clouds almost looking the same way since my eyes are taking in too much light for any meaningful distinguishment to take place, and I'll need to wait for the apertures to adjust. It seems to be dancing in the heatwaves, just over the curvature of the horizon, and I recognize it immediately from the signature T-tail and "eyebrow" windows that line the third-from-center main row of cockpit windows. It's a McDonnell Douglas MD-83, and the spectral reflection off of its chromium finish nearly blinds me as the fuselage-to-sun angles line up like fleeting memories as the jet pivots on its front nosewheel. The nosewheel isn't actually the most intriguing thing about this aircraft. There's a big tray, or boot, that's attached to the pin-axle of the pair of wheels. A water deflector, to minimize foreign object damage (FOD) to the pair of rear-mounted JT8D-219 low-bypass turbofans, each capable of 20,000 lbf of static thrust when at full power. And then there's the control surfaces–the ailerons, rudder, and elevators. They're not mechanically actuated, in fact, they're just free-hanging components linked to the main control architecture of the old jet. When it accelerate to V1 (takeoff speed), the Bernoulli effect will allow for strategically placed miniscule tabs on each of these control surfaces to move up and down and in turn, move the entire control surface. It's actually genius. Control a surface with surface in itself. Why? Who knows. Back to the main story. 

As the jet lumbers onto the parallel taxiway to 17L, the twin landing lights flip down from the tips of the wings. To give you a visual, they look like what would happen if you flipped an old Miata over and engaged its headlights. And then there's the JT8Ds, which have a distinctive song, that's probably the most succint way to describe it. They whine like a typical idling jet, but you can *feel* it. There's a distinctive metallic note to the idling sound, which, when paired with the sound of air rushing past something *extremely* fast, about sums up the sound. It's beautiful, to say the least, like an aural footprint which you can pinpoint instantly. The Doppler effect just enhances the experience. Holding short of the runway, the jet engages its main landing lights, which really are useless in the midday sun. They still stand out, though, big halogen bulbs pumping yellow light into a white abyss of the earth. Slowly but surely, the engines begin the spool up, unlocking new properties of the big JT8D turbines. I'm transfixed, and the stones underneath my shoes and ants crawling beside me are a distant thought, and I hope they feel the same way as I do now. The engines now scream in protest, and as the first-stage compressor fan blade tips exceed the speed of sound, a buzz is audible, not like a bee, but more like a bandsaw or high-velocity angle grinder. The pilot, probably looking forward to this moment, disengages the parking brake and the old fossil-like beast of a plane lurches forward. Red, blue, white, and chrome fly past in that frame, forming a maelstrom of color which looks like some patriotic introduction to a news channel. As the MD83's engines pass my location, I feel the thunder of 40000 pounds of hot air, jet-A1 exhaust, and unfortunate animals or debris which happen to kiss the invisible force of humankind. The roar is undescribably climactic; my entire chest cavity vibrates and the rocks and silt underneath the underwhelming monumental throne upon which I perch quake like there's a moving earthquake in procession. My eardrums are fine because the sound doesn't seem to target them–it targets *me*. It's everywhere, even the stupid-looking birds perched on a nearby tree sit still in apparent awe as the shimmering leaves around them shake in comical fear. It's a careful blend of heat waves from the jet exhaust and superheated concrete, with an added note of brown smoke from burnt oil which sets the final scene. The whine of the tires increases feverishly in pitch as the roar grows more distant and permeates the surrounding air, as if its a warning. Then, it's off. The silver bullet is nearly vertical as it leaps off of the sun-kissed runway into a sky which paints a picture of itself on its fuselage, like a bloated motion picture without purpose. A fleeting right slip and turn, and the jet is off to Dallas, Charlotte, or Los Angeles with its passengers who probably don't care, engrossed in some music, book or movie while the real entertainment is right around them. The brown smoke trail recedes and my ears ring appreciatively. The MD83 is a distant thing now. It was here then, now it isn't. It feels unreal, just a minute back I could almost reach out and touch it but now it's gone, accelerating to 250 knots as it quickly approaches 10,000 feet at an impressive climbrate that gives any military jet a run for its money. Satisfied, I look back to the car and jog back over to the door and get in, blasting the air conditioner and glancing over at the spot I just stood and the brain-etched image of the jet holding short. I then head home, thinking about what I just saw and at the time, unable to put it in words. The Super 80 is off, a workhorse of its day approaching old age and imminent retirement. Just like any human.