---
title: The Spur of Productivity
author: Sidharth Baskaran
date: July 16, 2021
---

I think I've found it. Why I haven't been able to achieve the *ideal level of productivity*. To give you an idea of what I mean, just conjure the image of sweat-by-excitement, rapidly drumming calloused fingers on keys, a scratch pad full of equations and diagrams...you get it. Picking out the detail of drumming fingers–this is characteristic of my behavior when I'm "highly motivated." It's an excitement of sorts, a side effect of a brain which is churning out ideas and solutions too fast for the subconscious to process and implement viscerally. This ideal is so far up the air for me that it's a joke. It's not that I'm not good enough to reach this ideal–in fact, I'll explain why that's an extremely good thing. I've always been caught up in the idea of reaching the ultimate level of productivity. It's a matter of guilt. If I'm not able to get something done which was slated into my schedule, guilt invariably settles in. Productivity seems to be the magic cure to this issue. But it's not. Think of it this way: If you're already at the peak level of productivity (whatever that may be), there's no guilt. Guilt is a force-field, a gravity of sorts which keeps you on track to goals. If we were all so productive, we wouldn't need to do anything since it'd be done. We'd just float into the universe without a single thread of resistance. Panaceas like this don't exist, by this logic at least. Actually, they probably don't at all. The more you think you've found a solution, the more you haven't.

Distractions are generally throught of as on the opposite spectral end of productivity, just in weighty or qualitative terms. The phone always goes "*Hey look man, here's another text message or supposedly important email*." Or it's some lame invention I come up with suddenly and have the urge to go into a Wikipedia rabbithole of uselessness (I can't find a use for CO2-launched folding drones right now, so I should probably pull myself back into the mundane reality. Motorized scooters and desk setups don't make the cut either). We've generally taught ourselves to avoid these distractions consciously, as a way of policing the mind from delving into them when we should be working. This is useless advice, and doesn't work for me at all. By making myself aware of the distractions around me, I'm tempted to splurge time on them because I feel, by policing myself, that I've done a good deed which warrants a indulgence.

**Instead of thinking about avoiding the distractions, think about them.** Well, not really. I got obsessed with something this week, namely what isn't really relevant to this discussion, or whatever this is supposed to be. So yeah, get distracted with something. Lose youself to this idea, person, item, thought, whatever it may be. Get to the point where you are so obsessed with this figment that it becomes your second nature, a habit, that doesn't require a second thought. When you wake up, your mind should immediately bound to it. You should sleep with it ricocheting inside your head. It needs to define you in a way that you don't want to admit or accept–it needs to be *in you*. I find that a good measure is to eat your favorite food or sit in front of your favorite object, to absorb its presence into yourself until those favorites become nothing. Soon enought, you'll drive yourself partly insane from this distractive obsession. It'll consume you to the extent that you'll need to seek out an avenue (which is work, or productive matter) to engage in as a form of distracting yourself. You see, what just happened is that the tables got turned. What was originally a loathed distraction became severe enough that work, which you know is paramount in importance, is the distraction you seek out. There is a catch. It's not like this strategy can just work for everyone. Finding the obsessive distraction is probably a process or something so good luck figuring that out. But the point is that this method works. I was able to work nonstop, without breaks, and felt attached to my work in a religious way. At this point the distraction is the second cover of your life–the first is your work. Turn over the card that defines you, back and forth many times, until you find what you need to do. You'll have to choose what defines you: the distraction or what society (and honestly you too) deems to be more important.